[DOCFIX] Add doc on Presto and Iceberg (#13718)
Alluxio/alluxio: docs/en/compute/Presto-Iceberg.md

---
layout: global
title: Querying Iceberg Tables with Presto and Alluxio
nickname: Presto-Iceberg
group: Compute Integrations
priority: 2
---

Presto has introduced support for [Iceberg tables](https://iceberg.apache.org/) in version 0.256.

This document describes how to use Presto to query Iceberg tables through Alluxio.

* Table of Contents
{:toc}

In order to use Presto to query an Iceberg table, make sure you have set up Presto, Hive metastore 
and Alluxio. If you haven't done so, please refer to the 
[guide]({{ '/en/compute/Presto.html' | relativize_url }}) on general Presto installation 
and configuration. Most of that guide apply for Iceberg workflows as well, and this document 
covers the specific instructions for working with Iceberg tables.

> Before proceeding, make sure you have a working setup of Presto, Hive metastore and Alluxio, 

Reviewer: Looks like a bit overlapped with line 16

and Presto can access data through Alluxio's filesystem interface. 
The [guide]({{ '/en/compute/Presto.html' | relativize_url }}) mentions two approaches that 
Presto can access data through Alluxio: via the filesystem interface, and via the catalog service. 

> Alluxio has not added support for Iceberg in the catalog service yet, so for Iceberg tables Presto 

Reviewer: Might be out of scope of this doc, I'm just curious what kind of support needed for Iceberg in catalog service? Did we have any relevant discussions before？

Author: I'm not particularly sure about this, but from what I know about the existing Hive support, we need to make SDS understand the Iceberg format so that SDS can mount the correct files, report statistics of the tables to Presto when it's generating query plans, etc.

Reviewer: Gotcha, sounds good to me.

needs to access them through Alluxio's filesystem interface.

## Install Alluxio client jar to Presto Iceberg connector

Copy the Alluxio client jar located at `{{site.ALLUXIO_CLIENT_JAR_PATH}}` into Presto Iceberg 
connector's directory located at `${PRESTO_HOME}/plugin/iceberg/`. Then restart the Presto server:

```console
$ ${PRESTO_HOME}/bin/launcher restart
```

> Also note that the same client jar file needs to be copied to Hive's `lib` directory.

Reviewer: Just wanna clarify, why do we need to put the alluxio jar to hive's lib? is it for hive metastore or hive?  Is this step mandatory?

Author: What I really meant is that the jar needs to be on the classpath of Hive. I've always copied the jar to that directory, so I went with that. I changed it to align with the instructions from the [Hive article](https://docs.alluxio.io/ee/user/stable/en/compute/Hive.html#basic-setup).

> is it for hive metastore or hive?

For Hive Metastore.

> Is this step mandatory

From what I have exprienced without that jar, Presto will fail to create a new schema with location set to an Alluxio URI. The error is `java.io.IOException No FileSystem for scheme: alluxio`.

Reviewer: I see, thank you for clarifying!

In case you haven't done so, please refer to the 
[section]({{ '/en/compute/Hive.html' | relativize_url }}#basic-setup) on setting up Hive to 
work with Alluxio.

## Configure Presto to use the Iceberg connector

Presto reads and writes an Iceberg table using the 
[Iceberg connector](https://prestodb.io/docs/current/connector/iceberg.html). To enable the Iceberg 
connector, create a catalog for Iceberg connector in Presto's installation directory as 
`${PRESTO_HOME}/etc/catalog/iceberg.properties`:

```properties
connector.name=iceberg
hive.metastore.uri=thrift://localhost:9083
```

> Change the Hive connection URI to match your Hive setup.

Reviewer: To be more precise, I would say Hive-Metastore rather than Hive here.

## Create a schema and an Iceberg table

For demonstration purposes, we will create an example schema and an Iceberg table.

Launch the Presto CLI client, and run the following statements:

```sql

> CREATE SCHEMA iceberg_test;

Reviewer: nit: should we do 'use iceberg.default' first?  or `CREATE SCHEMA iceberg.iceberg_test;` ?

Author: I accidentally left out the command to start the client with `--catalog iceberg`. This has been fixed in the last commit.

Reviewer: Cool, using --catalog is great

---
layout: global

> title: Querying Iceberg Tables with Presto and Alluxio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Running Presto on Iceberg Tables with Alluxio
```

> nickname: Presto-Iceberg

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nickname: Presto on Iceberg (Experimental)
```

group: Compute Integrations
priority: 2
---

Presto has introduced support for [Iceberg tables](https://iceberg.apache.org/) in version 0.256.

> This document describes how to use Presto to query Iceberg tables through Alluxio.

Reviewer 2: Add a statement that this page is currently experimental?

* Table of Contents
{:toc}

In order to use Presto to query an Iceberg table, make sure you have a working setup of Presto, 
Hive Metastore and Alluxio, and Presto can access data through Alluxio's filesystem interface.
If not, please refer to the 
[guide]({{ '/en/compute/Presto.html' | relativize_url }}) on general Presto installation 
and configuration. Most of that guide apply for Iceberg workflows as well, and this document 
covers the specific instructions for working with Iceberg tables.

The [guide]({{ '/en/compute/Presto.html' | relativize_url }}) mentions two approaches that 
Presto can access data through Alluxio: via the filesystem interface, and via the catalog service. 
Alluxio has not added support for Iceberg in the catalog service yet, so for Iceberg tables Presto 
needs to access them through Alluxio's filesystem interface.

> ## Install Alluxio client jar to Presto Iceberg connector

Reviewer 2: Let's have the outline like this (similar as Presto page):

<pre>

## Prerequisites
Put what you require

## Basic Setup
Describe the bare minimal setup to let users run this stack

## Examples
Put the query example

## Advanced Setup
Any advanced configuration (non default)
</pre>

Copy the Alluxio client jar located at `{{site.ALLUXIO_CLIENT_JAR_PATH}}` into Presto Iceberg 
connector's directory located at `${PRESTO_HOME}/plugin/iceberg/`. Then restart the Presto server:

```console
$ ${PRESTO_HOME}/bin/launcher restart
```

Also note that the same client jar file needs to be on Hive's classpath. 
If not, please refer to the [section]({{ '/en/compute/Hive.html' | relativize_url }}#basic-setup)
on setting up Hive to work with Alluxio.

## Configure Presto to use the Iceberg connector

Presto reads and writes an Iceberg table using the 
[Iceberg connector](https://prestodb.io/docs/current/connector/iceberg.html). To enable the Iceberg 
connector, create a catalog for Iceberg connector in Presto's installation directory as 
`${PRESTO_HOME}/etc/catalog/iceberg.properties`:

```properties
connector.name=iceberg
hive.metastore.uri=thrift://localhost:9083
```

Change the Hive Metastore connection URI to match your setup.

## Create a schema and an Iceberg table

For demonstration purposes, we will create an example schema and an Iceberg table.

Launch the Presto CLI client with the following command:

> ```shell

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```console
```

Author: Done
